ICESHEET - a program to create ice sheet reconstructions


This is software to create perfectly plastic ice sheets. I used this to create reconstructions of the Laurentide Ice Sheet (see The NAICE model below). There is a paper on this in Geoscience Model Development. I have included a sample problem with the Greenland Ice Sheet with the scripts that should make it pretty easy to run the program. I usually modify these scripts to suit the problem I am working on. They require Generic Mapping Tools and NETCDF Tools. In particular, ICESHEET requires GMT formatted binary files as input for the basal shear stress and basal topography. Note if you downloaded the version of this file from the GMD website, I forgot to include the shapefiles needed to create the shear stress files, so download it again. Instructions to run this can be found on my website (https://raisedbeaches.net/2016/05/22/icesheet-1-0/).


If you are just starting out, go into the "Greenland_final" folder and run "run_everything.sh". It will check to make sure everything is installed correctly, and you can easily change parameters related to making reconstructions.

ICESHEET is written in Fortran. To compile, you will need to have automake and a Fortran compiler installed. By default it assumes you have gfortran, if you are using a different compiler, go into the makefile files and change it. Note that using the Intel Fortran compiler can result in a speed increase on the order of a factor of two for ICESHEET, if you have it, I definitely recommend it over gfortran!


If you use this program, please site the following paper:

Gowan, E.J., Tregoning, P., Purcell, A., Lea, J., Fransner, O.J., Noormets, R. and Dowdeswell, J.A., 2016. ICESHEET 1.0: a program to produce paleo-ice sheet reconstructions with minimal assumptions. Geoscientific Model Development, 9(5), pp. 1673-1682, doi:10.5194/gmd-9-1673-2016

For a detailed application with the Laurentide Ice Sheet (the NAICE model), see this paper:

Gowan, E.J., Tregoning, P., Purcell, A., Montillet, J.-P., and McClusky, S., 2016. A model of the western Laurentide Ice Sheet, using observations of glacial isostatic adjustment. Quaternary Science Reviews, 139, pp. 1-16, doi:10.1016/j.quascirev.2016.03.003

Adjustments to the Innuitian ice sheet were done by Sara Khosravi. Details can be found in her master's thesis. A paper is currently in preparation.

Khosravi, S., 2017. Comparison of the past climate in Northern Canada and Greenland. Master's Thesis, University of Bremen and Alfred Wegener Institute, Helmholtz Center for Polar and Marine Research, 70p.
